:idprefix:
:idseparator: -
:toc: right
:toclevels: 2

# Using Actors for Chats

Actors are fairly simple: they receive messages, do something with them, and
potentially respond to them. This isn't unlike the process that you go through
when you call a method on a regular class; however, when you send a message to
an actor, it is processed after any earlier messages you sent, never at the
same time. This makes it a lot easier to reason about what's going on at any
given point, even if multiple threads are sending messages to the actor.

## Storing the Message List

We're going to use a fairly basic actor for now. As before, we're going to have
a single chat room for the entire site we're building, so we'll use a singleton
object. Lift provides a very simple actor implementation, which we'll be using
here. There are more complicated actor systems, like the one provided by
http://aka.io[Akka], but they're only necessary in cases where you need more
flexibility or fault tolerance. We'll stick to the easy stuff, starting with a
new file at `src/main/scala/code/actor/ChatActor.scala`:

```scala:src/main/scala/code/actor/ChatActor.scala
package code
package actor

import net.liftweb.actor._

case class ChatMessage(poster: String, body: String)

case class MessagePosted(message: ChatMessage)

object ChatActor extends LiftActor {
  private var messageEntries = List[ChatMessage]()

  def messageHandler = {
    case MessagePosted(newMessage) =>
      messageEntries ::= newMessage
  }
}
```

This provides a very basic actor that can receive a new message and add it to
its internal list. We've moved the `ChatMessage` class from the `Chat` snippet
to this file. Typically, messages to actors are case classes. This is because
they're easy to pattern match (as you can see, message handling is done via
pattern matching footnote:[Strictly speaking, `messageHandler` is a
`PartialFunction`. This means that it can match any subset of objects that it
wants to.]) and because they're generally immutable, so there's no chance of
someone else trying to modify the message as we're processing it.

To ask the actor to add a message, we'll send it the `MessagePosted` message
using the `!` operator. Here's how we can update our code in the `Chat`
snippet:

```scala:src/main/scala/code/snippet/Chat.scala
...
import actor._
...
  def sendMessage = {
    ...
    "type=submit" #> SHtml.submitButton(() => {
      for (body <- message) {
        ChatActor ! MessagePosted(message)
      }
    })
  }
...
```

Now, whenever a message is posted, it will be sent to the `ChatActor`, which
will update its internal list.

This is, however, only half of the equation. Putting messages into the actor
isn't useful if we can't get them back out!

## Retrieving Messages

To retrieve messages, we can add a new message for the `ChatActor`:

```scala:src/main/scala/code/actor/ChatActor.scala
...
case class MessagePosted(message: ChatMessage)
case object GetMessages
...
```

And a handler for it:

```scala:src/main/scala/code/actor/ChatActor.scala
...
  def messageHandler = {
    ...
    case GetMessages =>
      reply(messageEntries)
  }
...
```

When handling `GetMessages`, we use the `reply` method. This method lets us
send an answer back to the person who sent us this message. By default,
messages don't send answers, and the `!` operator is non-blocking, meaning it
adds the message to the end of the actor's list of messages to process and then
lets the original code continue running without waiting for the actor to deal
with it.

To wait for a reply, we have to use the `!?` operator instead. We do this when
listing messages by updating the `Chat` snippet:

```scala:src/main/scala/code/snippet/Chat.scala
...
  def messages = {
    val messageEntries = Box.asA[List[ChatMessage]](ChatActor !? GetMessages) openOr List()

    ClearClearable &
    "li" #> messageEntries.map { entry =>
      ".poster *" #> entry.poster &
      ".body *" #> entry.body
    }
  }
...
```

Two things to notice here. First off, we use `ChatActor !? GetMessages` to
retrieve the messages. This will block until the `ChatActor` can process our
message and send the reply back to us. Unfortunately, because we're not
invoking a method, there is no type safety in the `!?` operator, so the
compiler doesn't know what the type that `GetMessages` will return to us is.
Because of that, we have to do some casting. To deal with this, Lift provides a
very handy utility function, `Box.asA[T]`; it attempts to convert its parameter
to the type `T`, and, if it succeeds, provides a `Full` `Box` with the
converted value of the appropriate type. If it fails, it provides an `Empty`
`Box` instead.

To deal with the fact that the `Box` may be `Full` or `Empty`, we use `openOr`
on the `Box`. We do this because the type of `messageEntries` is now a
`Box[List[ChatMessage]]`, meaning a box that *contains* a list of chat
messages. `openOr` will give us the plain list of messages if the `Box` is
`Full`, and return the second parameter, an empty `List`, if the `Box` is
`Empty`.

It's worth mentioning that it seems like we *know* we'll be getting a
`List[ChatMessage]` from the actor. However, the compiler *doesn't*, and that
means it can't guarantee to us that future changes won't render that assumption
false. Using `Box.asA` ensures that, if someone changes the `ChatActor` later
to reply with something else, our snippet won't blow up in the user's faceâ€”it
will just not display the existing messages. The intrepid reader can then go
and fix the issue.

Another annoyance in the code as it stands now is that if 8000 people are
posting messages and I log into the site, my page won't load until those 8000
messages are processed by the actor. That's because of how `reply` works: we
wait until the actor gets to our message and then replies to it. There are far
better ways of dealing with both of these issues, which we'll talk about when
we talk about using `CometActor`s link:9-comet-actors[later].

First, though, let's go back and look at how we can let the user link:8-customizable-usernames.adoc[change their
username so they don't have to use our nasty automatically-generated name].
